All
right.
Well, thanks, thank you for having us, everyone.
Um, you will have seen our written submissions.
Um, I'm here to present a short overview of what the
Regulations Review Committee considered in our, um,
Regulatory Standards Briefing that we opened at the same time as the
Parliament was considering, um, the RSB Bill.
Our presentation to you is about how the Standing Orders Committee might
grapple in this Parliament, um, with what is a
relatively, um, unclear principle in our standing orders now, but is a very
well-settled and well-established piece of our law which we inherit,
um, from the English common law, which is parliamentary deference.
Um,
we came to the view as a committee that parliamentary deference applies
in the situation where you have any overlap between the role of the Regulations
Review Committee and the RSB, the board, uh, which is
a body of the executive delegated by the executive to consider,
um, regulation and particularly secondary legislation.
That's where the overlap is, and that's where it would be useful for us-
Can you s- can you just go through that again?
Sure. Um, we think there is an area of
overlap between the functions of the Regulatory Review, Regulations Review
Committee,
particularly around its delegations from the House to consider secondary
legislation and any legislation which includes secondary
legislation in it. The RS- the
Regulatory Standards Board, which is a body of the executive, has a
remit which overlaps with that insofar as it's considering
regulations which are empowered by primary legislation.
So for instance, one of the wins of the, uh, Regulatory Standards
Board, which has been well-publicized, is rules about setbacks
for garages and sheds built on people's properties.
That is empowered by regulations and so it is also within the
remit of the Regulations Review Committee.
Th- those are processes which are different
because, um, but in many cases you can imagine where
somebody, a member of the public, trying to raise an issue with the regulations
that apply to their shed might come to the Regulations Review Committee or
might come to the Regulatory Standards Board, different
processes.
But isn't- isn't there a difference between what is law and what is
regulation?
Yes.
So wouldn't the situation that you're talking about
be law?
No. I'm- I'm describing a situation where the person in
this situation, the citizen who's following the law, ha- has- has been
regulated by regulations which have been decided by an
executive decision maker, a lawmaker.
In the case of sheds, um, I can't tell
you what- what regulator that would be, um, but we're talking here about,
um, in some cases, councils, in some cases,
um, say the Teaching Council of New Zealand setting its fees.
I don't think they've got much to do with sheds.
(laughs) Um, say the Gas
Fitters Plumbers and Drainlayers Board, um, some professional
body that has been delegated by Parliament through its primary
legislation to set rules that apply to people and also set
fees can either come now to the Regulatory Standards
Board or to me and ask to complain and then I will ask
my colleagues here at the table whether we would investigate that complaint.
Mm-hmm.
So where there is an overlap, I think there is a role for the Standing Orders
Committee to clarify what the place of the Regulations
Review Committee is in that. And we think
unanimously that- that i- that the, um,
the- the sort of primary lawmaking body in this is Parliament's
body, which is the Regulations Review
Committee. Um, we heard a number of submissions on this
matter. A number of suggestions came to us about how you might deal with that and
we're happy to make them available to the Standing Orders Committee.
We have not proposed to you what that change is because the simplest thing
that the Standing Orders Committee could do today would be to affirm
that the parliamentary deference applies and that so when you have the
executive in Parliament that- that has primacy-
primacy, then Parliament as a whole, then the
executive. And when those- those things are all slightly different
and in this case Parliament has delegated to the Regulatory, uh, to
the Regulations Review Committee to scrutinize secondary legislation, hear
complaints about it and so anything that came to the Regulations Review
Committee, uh, would be sort of primary source of decision
making around those issues. For instance, if the
sheds complaint came to us and the sheds complaint came to the
Regulations Standards Board to investigate, we would
think that it would be appropriate to establish some kind of communications between
the committee and that board. We have slightly different functions
and different intents. One is set by primary legislation, one is set
by Parliament. But-
So, just- just in the interest of time,
uh, Dr. Wilson, do you want to make a comment on this
at this point or-
We'll just-
... reserve a position for discussion later?
Um, sure, we can have a discussion later and I- I have discussed this with the
Regulations Review Committee, so I would suggest using the time with them.
Okay, go on.
Um,
if there are any questions, um, happy to answer those, but the one point I wanted
to make is, um, that a particular concern
for us is that if you don't resolve, which we're
asking you to resolve, that there is, that the Parliament, parliamentary deference
does apply in the situation that the Regulations Review Committee finds
itself in now. If you don't choose to do that,
strongly, then we do think you need to change the standing
orders to accommodate for the pretty novel
situation that could arise here-...
or even not, um, presupposing that the Regulations
Standards Board would in any way overlap with parliament's functions,
simply make it clear that in future anything which did
overlap that was an executive appointed body with the
role of a parliamentary committee, particularly a special committee like
standing orders or like regulations review, which is broadly bipartisan and
has a special function in our parliament, then you should accommodate for
that in the standing orders and make it clear that the, the role of parliament
there is being carried out by that
committee.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Any questions on that? Simon.
Briefly, um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I know in your submission, uh, that you state the
Regs Review Committee's built up decades of non-partisan jurisprudence employing a
diplomatic rather than a coercive approach.
So, if you, say,
take, uh, the case that you've made and somebody's unhappy
about, say, a district plan or a regional plan rule around how
close you can build a shed to the boundary, um,
I, I mean if you want resolution, are you gonna come to the
reg- reg- Regulations Review Committee or are you gonna go to an
executive body that has the power to issue directives
and, and essentially do stuff, do something?
Because it doesn't sound like apart from being diplomatic, uh,
we actually have any powers.
Great question. I have a legend of the Regulations Review Committee with me-
(laughs)
... here today who has had some success as a me- member moving a disallowance
motion.
Yeah, so the, um, on, on that, there, there is a specific power that only permanent
members of the Regulation Review Committee has, which is the power, um, of
disallowance, to make a disallowance motion to
the, the House. Um, that can and, and I, I personally have
exercised that
power. That's what I thought.
Mm-hmm. But you could bring it about your shed. And the point there, Mr.
Speaker, is that, um, it would also be useful for some protections
in standing orders to, um, be introduced around the disallowance
power of the Regulations Review Committee.
Um, we have submitted in our submission that that power could be bolstered.
Um, it is timely, um, where
there seems to be cross-partisan support to improve the power
of, of both the executive and the parliament to deregulate where a
number of regulations have arisen over time that haven't been looked at.
Simply sort of a function of the way that regulation is
introduced and not taken off the books.
In that case, the Regulations Review Committee's process for that is
quite limited. It is hard to bring a disallowance motion.
If there is cross-partisan support for that, now is the time
to bolster that power.
And I would make the additional comment that the Minister of Regulation did, um,
uh, talk to our committee earlier in, in-
Who did you say?
The Minister of Regulation, um, and did, uh-
Is what? Sorry, I missed the-
Oh, the, sorry, the, the Minister of Regulation spoke to our committee, um, some
months ago and was supportive of the committee exercising that,
uh, power of disallowance, um, more often which I think goes to, uh, Mr.
Court's question.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Helpful.
That's it.
That's it. Okay. Any comments from anybody on that?
Yep.
So, and how did you as a committee reach this decision?
Great question. Um, the Regulations Review Committee is special because it
is cross-partisan. Um, we don't have a regular attendee from
ACT but it would be great to have that as well.
Um, the-
Well, we're trying to get more people elected but you got-
There you go. (laughs) ... every three years you gotta, you gotta-
You can come and join us, Simon. You're here.
Yeah. No, no, carry on while
Um, the way that we made the decision was, um, at all times
by consensus.
Mm-hmm.
These, it's important to recognize here that we're not making strident
recommendations to you about what the standing orders changes should be
because, um,
exactly what they will say will be a matter for the parties to determine.
But the way that that room works is on u- unanimity.
Um, there is very little, I would say, caucusing around that
table. Um, these are views that are generally held because the submitters
who, who submitted on our, uh, interrogation of
regulatory system, um, all made pretty clear
submissions that, um, there was a, there was an issue of overlap here that
needed to be addressed by the parliament as a whole.
One of the things I've clicked on is, uh, uh, once sitting in your
chair, we asked the, uh,
then, um, not sure who it was that was supporting us, um,
which government agency would be your most supportive-
PCO.
Sorry?
PCO. Sorry. It was, it was PCO, uh, to try and
ascertain how many regulations were active in New Zealand
at that time
and that was an exercise that consumed them for quite some time.
Clark may have an answer on that. But, um,
uh, what I know that the number was in excess of 60,000
active regulations. So a question will be, how
many have you disallowed? Some of them have got to be absolute junk.
Yep. It is not a large percentage.
A very, very, very small amount.
Yeah.
Right. Okay. Why?
Yeah. It's a good question.
Is, is, it is a good question.
Because there is a government majority and it is incentive for any executive
government to allow for the disallowance of a regulation which its ministers are in
charge of.
Yeah. But have you proposed a bill to s-
get them-
Shall we draft one first?
... fix them?
(laughs) Um,
we, we have, uh, we have three active inquiries into
complaints which we are actively considering for disallowance
now. Um, of, of the number of complaints that we
have on our books, um, we do intend to try to
disallow more. But that is why I'm asking, uh, for
the consideration of the Standing Orders Review Committee of, of this
matter of should it be simpler, should it be more
Opposition led perhaps, or should there be a power of veto for the
government at all-... on the disallowance motions as they currently are
formed, because there will always be a disincentive for any government to
allow-
Well, well the disallowance is an informal veto.
Uh, sorry, the veto you're talking about is very informal. It's not a formal veto.
If I could, Mr. Chair? There, there's an inherent tension here in that, um, uh, th-
the committee, uh, um, by precedent aims to
operate, uh, by consensus. Um, individual
members of the committee can make a disallowance motion.
However, it doesn't have to have the agreement of the committee.
Yeah.
But...
Yeah. Well, we're at that stage.
(laughs)
All right. Thank you very much for your time. We appreciate it.
Thanks for having
us. It's a very interesting discussion.
Thank you.
And I'll cross today. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Yeah.
Did we get briefed?
Rude.
It's not
Yeah, it's
******* Um,
uh, okay.
Joshua.
Kia Ora, Mr. Speaker. Um, kia ora anohi rā everyone.
It's nice to see you at Merry Christmas. I've got, um, 10 areas.
I'm not going to go into all 10, but there's 10 things, um, based on, uh, work
that's gone on in children and youth participation spaces, and some
other insights based on my family experiences of, uh, engaging with
Parliament in the last few years that I just wanted to share with you.
Um, first one, I know you've got this challenge
of the increasing number of submissions and then trying to work out who
gets to have time with you when it gets to the hearing stage.
I think it might be time for the committee to make a principle that children and
young people who can't vote should have extra support
to make sure they're always heard through, uh, a process
in person or online. I'm not comfortable that it's, um,
left to chance. I think it should be explicit.
Uh, I also think that committee chairs and you as members should
encourage your peers that if extra time is needed so that
a, a, a really young child or someone under 18 wants to speak to
Parliament, that they should be able to do that.
And I think the five minutes for someone who's arriving potentially for the first
time is, is too little and it's, uh, and yeah, and
you've got the ability to, to enable that discretion, particularly for under 18s.
And I, I think it's something I'd love you to think about.
Um, next one is just continue to encourage and, and thank
you. My dad, my family had, had our grandma's citizenship
returned, um, after the, the repeal in the
1982, um, Lissak case and then, um,
the... Yeah, and that being brought through.
Grandma is delighted to be a New Zealand citizen now at, um,
89 years old. Um, the thing that helped our family a lot
though was the, the, the committee, the Governance Administration Committee
making sure there was enough time to hear our family and other Pacific and
Samoan families, um, on this. So, I guess it's just an
encouragement. Bills to do with the reconciliation of something, please, if
it's at all possible, as more volumes of submissions come
through, can that be emphasized as being
important. Maybe it doesn't need to be written but anywhere, but it, it mattered,
it mattered to my family, so I just wanted to share that.
Um, next thing, I think that
from a community perspective, once every three years this opportunity to talk
about the rules of Parliament
isn't, isn't enough for us. Um, I've come from a Pacific youth
development charity based in Christchurch who runs politically neutral
opportunities for Pacific young people to learn about our democracy and engage in
our democracy. There's often been lots of changes that we've wanted to see to make
this place more connected, more enabling for them and, and to grow as
young New Zealand citizens. Uh, but waiting every three
years for Standing Orders Review to come round or the Parliament Bill, which there
was a great submission from Pacific young people in, um, isn't enough.
So, we think... And a number of sub- submissions to Standing Orders
Committees over the last, uh, three or four goes have said, "Can we
have an annual opportunity for the public to speak to you about
Parliamentary engagement?" Um, and then things like live streaming at Youth
Parliament, Parliamentary privilege for the Youth MPs, making sure the budget
of Youth Parliament is adequate, um, whether petitions should have names of
two people, because particularly for under 18 year olds there's...
Having your, your own name, your single name by yourself up there, out there in the
world is potentially a little bit difficult.
And, uh, yeah, whether there should be the ability for MPs
to receive, uh, a petition in multiple names.
Uh, sorry,
receive a petition, have multiple names of members as the receiving members.
Just, there's a number of issues and opportunities that, um, the Standing Orders
don't allow that, uh, we think an annual opportunity for Parliamentary
engagement discussions would enable.
We also think that Parliament should sit in the South Island once per year.
Um, that's based on other work that's gone on from other community members and you
should activate the, the meeting at Devonport once a year to practice emergency
provisions. Um, and maybe develop a select committee workshop,
which is an opportunity instead of an inquiry, um, to go into a
place and just have informal discussions with communities about the
topics related to your, to whatever committee. There's...
Yeah, we, we feel based on the young people that I've talked to
who... You can find the links to the wider work and, uh, the work I've been
involved in 15 years in, um, Pacific youth participation and democracy, that
we need more, more space to talanoa with you about this and other related things.
So that's all, Mr. Chair, Mr. Speaker, and if there's anything else to
follow on about, here to do that. Ko fetaai.
Yeah. Any other questions before that?
Mr. Wise, it's, um, thank you for your submission, Joshua-
Thanks. Thanks.
It seems quite comprehensive. Um, I know you, you, you talk
about, um, having Parliament select committee workshop-
Yes.
... outside of Parliament.
Um, and it seems-Uh, select committees do, uh, from
time to time travel-
Yeah.
... outside of Parliament on a prec- on a specific issue.
Yes.
So you're just talking a general ch- chat, or what, what is it you-
Yeah.
... you, you expect of?
I think that maybe you might only be able to do it once a year.
But the, I think the public, eh, confidence in Parliament, you know,
is, is, is challenged all the time.
One of the ways we can do that is just enable Parliament to be more with the
community. And what, um, your team, Dr.
Wilson does, uh, is lovely, you know, going out there and setting up the banner,
and the, uh, children can pass around the, the mace and pretend to be the
Speaker. Uh, the, those, those opportunities are really important.
So whatever issue it is, uh, committees being closer to
community will make a big difference.
And, and also it might help focus y- the submissions you get because
people (laughs) better understand what you're actually looking for.
We... To decrease the volume, we need people to have more of a steer on what you're
actually listening and looking for.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, Joshua, I think some of what you said is, is, uh, uh, really
valuable.
Thank you.
I'll certainly take it on into consideration.
Yup.
But I have to be clear to you that I, uh, uh, uh, have
become-
Yes.
... a strong opponent of the Youth of Par- Youth Parliament.
I think it's disgraced itself in the last two efforts.
Okay.
Uh, and, um, I don't think that it reaches enough young people.
Yup, that's true.
I think it is very, very exclusive.
Yup.
Uh, and it has become overly politicized, uh, in the
last two, two Youth Parliaments that we've had.
I completely agree. Yup, the process is not set up to enable as many young
people as w- who could possibly participate to participate.
When each member, it's no disrespect, you each have your own process about how
you choose young people and particularly young people who have easier access than
others. Yeah, that's, that's not the fair dinkum, fair go kind of
thing. And, uh, yeah, some of how it's set up, it doesn't
make it work either. You've got the Ministry of Youth Development who has its
appro- uh, ways and then the c- you know, the office do what they can
do. But you need a third party. You need the youth development
sector or someone outside o- of these things to help
support the young person to be independent and not to be tied up in
parties or whatever, to s- to, to grow as a whole person.
Yup, I s- I see you nodding that way, but that's just my view that they're, they're
so young, I think they may not know what they want their whole f- political
ideology to be for their whole life, so they should have an opportunity to just
participate in democracy and not have to choose any colors.
And some are, and it's too young, from my perspective.
But, um-
I think they, they are very encouraging comments that you're making.
Okay.
Yeah.
I think we can make it work though, so please don't throw it away.
(laughs) It's had too much good done from it, uh, fr- but even the last one, like
our charity in Christchurch didn't get a chance to help because there was just no
opportunity to. So, um, I mean, yeah-
Well, that, that... Look, you could go straight to the Ministry of Youth
Development-
Thank you, thank you.
... who do not take it seriously.
Okay.
And, um, I think have in their insistence on
how the program runs-
Yeah.
... somewhat destroyed it.
Yeah. Maybe it's the time for a new, a new group to be formed, including
some community members from youth development and other areas, for us to have more
influence on the program.
Mm-hmm.
I think we could lift the mana of it.
And I know the House is under challenge about the dignity and decorum and
things, and we can, we, we can work through that.
Positive Youth Development, uh, has run great programs in New Zealand, Blue
Light and all kinds of things. We just need to be let in to help. So, yeah.
Um, Trudy.
Have you had much experience of students that have come here as part of school
groups?
Yes.
'Cause I know in my-
Absolutely.
... like, even as an MP-
Yeah.
... and pri- prior to that, like, maybe opening that up-
... allows it to a greater... And, you know, it's almost impossible for people in
the South Island-
Yeah.
... and I'm lucky in Central North Island-
Yes.
... kids get the chance to do it. But I know that has massive benefits and you get
h- incredible feedback.
It does.
So...
I think w- we need to tell the stories more of the, the bus- nah, the Business in
Parliament Trust-
Yeah.
... and the funding that, that comes through and what those, eh-
... opportunities enable. I don't think that story's well told out there, that what
happens when young people come here and what they learn.
Also, if they're already here for, to come and visit, why not, uh,
take them to a committee, maybe that's the workshop, and get them to talk through
the issues and then, um, turn that into a submission with them there in the
room. There's kind of... We don't have to make
them appear when we need an answer to a bill at that moment.
They could have an experience and practice a bit earlier and just...
Yeah. So it's
developing the awareness, the practicing, the relationships
and that, that-
Yeah.
... experience here is how you do it.
But the education team do a very good-
They do. They're only
doing it to- ... a very good job of tailoring it.
They're amazing.
Can
I just-
Right, sorry.
... conclude that
then, uh, Sir- Thank you, sir.
... uh, and Trudy now.
I flagged you along.
Why just once a year in the South Island?
Oh-
Let's, let's face it.
The place is-
(laughs)
... crumbling. Something new is needed.
Well, I, I think if you wanna-
(laughs)
If you wanna have a, you know, a whole sitting block in Christchurch, maybe
some (laughs) of the community might have a, have a view, but I think it'd be good
for-
I've got a bit too. Too much, I don't know.
(laughs)
And then come to the stadium and-
Well, we might have to-
Yeah, all of it.
But I mean, hey, why can't Marlborough?
Why can't Marlborough young people just go and see Parliament
in Marlborough? The rest of the country is paying through check, Christchurch anyway, so they'll
pay for that too.
Yeah.
Yeah, no, we're very grateful. Uh, look, thank you very much, Joshua.
Thank you. Thank you. Lovely to see you all.
Thank
you. Merry Christmas. (laughs)
Thank you. It's worth a nod in the right
direction.
(laughs)